[pnp] Migrating VSTO Add-in code using shared code library (#1459)
OfficeDev/office-js-docs-pr: docs/pnp/migrate-vsto-to-office-web-add-in-shared-code-library-tutorial.md

The following diagram shows how the shared code library works for migration. Common code is refactored into a new shared code library. The code can remain written in its original language, such as C# or VB. This means you can continue using the code in the existing VSTO Add-in by creating a project reference. When you create the Office web add-in, it will also use the shared code library by calling into it through REST APIs.

![Diagram of VSTO Add-in and Office web add-in using a shared code library](../images/vsto-migration-shared-code-library.png)

Skills and techniques in this guide:

- Create a shared class library by refactoring code into a .NET class library.
- Create a REST API wrapper using ASP.NET Core for the shared class library.
- Call the REST API from the Office web add-in to access shared code.

## Prerequisites

To set up your development environment:

1. Install [Visual Studio 2019](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/).
2. Install the following workloads:
    a. ASP.NET and web development
    b. .NET Core cross-platform development
    c. Office/SharePoint development

>     d. Visual Studio Tools for Office (VSTO) Note that this is an Individual component.

Author: fixed

> You will also need the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also need the following:
```

- A Microsoft Azure Tenant. This add-in requires Azure Active Directiory (AD). Azure AD provides identity services that applications use for authentication and authorization. A trial subscription can be acquired here: [Microsoft Azure](https://account.windowsazure.com/SignUp).

## The Cell analyzer VSTO Add-in

This guide uses the [VSTO Add-in shared library for Office web add-in](https://github.com/OfficeDev/PnP-OfficeAddins/tree/vstoshared/Samples/VSTO-shared-code-start) PnP solution. The **/start** folder contains the VSTO Add-in solution that you will migrate. Your goal is to migrate the VSTO Add-in to a modern Office web add-in by sharing code when possible.

> [!NOTE]
> The sample uses C# but you can apply the techniques in this guide to a VSTO Add-in written in any .NET language.

1. Download the [VSTO Add-in shared library for Office web add-in](https://github.com/OfficeDev/PnP-OfficeAddins/tree/vstoshared/Samples/VSTO-shared-code-start) PnP solution to a working folder on your computer.
2. Start Visual Studio 2019 and open the **/start/Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.

> 3. From the **Debug** menu choose **Start Debugging**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. On the **Debug** menu, choose **Start Debugging**.
```
As per: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/procedures-instructions/describing-interactions-with-ui

You could also say  "Go to the **Debug** menu and select **Start Debugging**.

The add-in is a custom task pane for Excel. You can select any cell with text, and then choose the **Show Unicode** button. The add-in will display a list of each character in the text along with its corresponding Unicode number.

![Screenshot of the Cell analyzer VSTO add-in running in Excel](../images/pnp-cell-analyzer-vsto-add-in.png)

## Analyze types of code in the VSTO Add-in

> The first technique to apply is to analyze the add-in for which parts of code can be shared. In general there are three types of code to deal with when migrating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first technique to apply is to analyze the add-in for which parts of code can be shared. In general, there are three types of code you'll use when migrating.
```
"to deal with" is vernacular and doesn't translate well. You could use "you encounter".

Author: fixed

    {
        cellValue = rangeCell.Value.ToString();
    }

    // *** ALGORITHM CODE ***
    //convert string to Unicode listing
    string result = "";
    foreach (char c in cellValue)
    {
        int unicode = c;

        result += $"{c}: {unicode}\r\n";
    }
    
    // *** UI CODE ***
    //Output the result
    txtResult.Text = result;
}
```

Using this approach you can see that one section of code can be shared to the Office web add-in. The following code will need to be refactored into a separate class library.

```csharp
// *** ALGORITHM CODE ***
//convert string to Unicode listing
string result = "";
foreach (char c in cellValue)
{
    int unicode = c;

    result += $"{c}: {unicode}\r\n";
}
```

## Create a shared class library

VSTO Add-ins are created in Visual Studio as .NET projects, so we'll reuse .NET as much as possible to keep things simple. Our next technique is to create a class library and refactor shared code into that class library.

1. If you haven't already, start Visual Studio 2019 and open the **\start\Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.
2. Right-click the solution in **Solution Explorer** and choose **Add > New Project**.

> 3. In the **Add a new project dialog**, choose **Class Library (.NET Framework)** and choose **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the **Add a new project dialog**, choose **Class Library (.NET Framework)**, and choose **Next**.
```

    > [!NOTE]
    > Don't use the .NET Core class library because it will not work with your VSTO project.
5. In the **Configure your new project** dialog, set the following fields.
    - Set the  **Project name** to **CellAnalyzerSharedLibrary**.
    - Leave the **Location** at it's default value.
    - Set the **Framework** to **4.7.2**.
6. Choose **Create**.

> 7. After the project is created, rename the **Class1.cs** file to **CellOperations.cs**. You will be prompted to rename the class as well. Do that so the class name matches the file name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. After the project is created, rename the **Class1.cs** file to **CellOperations.cs**. A prompt to rename the class appears. Rename the class name so that it matches the file name.
```

```csharp
public class CellOperations
{
    static public string GetUnicodeFromText(string value)
    {
        string result = "";
        foreach (char c in value)
        {
            int unicode = c;

            result += $"{c}: {unicode}\r\n";
        }
        return result;
    }
}
```

### Use the shared class library in the VSTO Add-in

Now you need to update the VSTO Add-in to use the class library. This is important that both the VSTO Add-in and Office web add-in use the same shared class library so that future bug fixes or features are made in one location.

1. In **Solution Explorer** expand the **Cell-Analyzer** project, right-click the **CellAnalyzerPane.cs** file, and choose **View Code**.
2. In the `btnUnicode_Click` method, delete the following lines of code.

```csharp
//Convert to Unicode listing
    string result = "";
    foreach (char c in cellValue)
    {
        int unicode = c;
        result += $"{c}: {unicode}\r\n";
    }
```

3. Update the line of code under the `//Output the result` comment to read as follows:

```csharp
//Output the result
txtResult.Text = CellAnalyzerSharedLibrary.CellOperations.GetUnicodeFromText(cellValue);
```

> 6. From the **Debug** menu, choose **Start Debugging**. The custom task pane should still work as expected. Enter some text in a cell, and then test that you can convert it to a Unicode list with the add-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. On the **Debug** menu, choose **Start Debugging**. The custom task pane should work as expected. Enter some text in a cell, and then test that you can convert it to a Unicode list with the add-in.
```

## Create a REST API wrapper

The VSTO Add-in can use the shared class library directly since they are both .NET projects. However the Office web add-in won't be able to use .NET since it uses JavaScript. Next you will need to create a REST API wrapper. This enables the Office web add-in to call a REST API, which then passes the call along to the shared class library.

> 1. If you haven't already, start Visual Studio 2019 and open the **\start\Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you haven't already, start Visual Studio 2019, and open the **\start\Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.
```

2. Right-click the solution in **Solution Explorer** and choose **Add > New Project**.

> 3. In the **Add a new project dialog**, choose **ASP.NET Core Web Application** and choose **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the **Add a new project dialog**, choose **ASP.NET Core Web Application**, and choose **Next**.
```

> 4. In the **Configure your new project** dialog, set the following fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In the **Configure your new project** dialog, set the following fields:
```

>     - Set the  **Project name** to **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Set the **Project name** to **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI**.
```

>     - Leave the **Location** at it's default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In the **Location** field, leave the default value.
```

> 5. Choose **Create**.

Reviewer: Sidenote: I'm leaving all the "choose" commands because I think it's more "alternative-input friendly."  The menu commands should use "Select", so if you want to be a Microsoft Style stickler, you can change them. I.e. "On the **Blah** menu, select "blah." See[ https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/procedures-instructions/describing-interactions-with-ui]( https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/procedures-instructions/describing-interactions-with-ui)

Author: thanks!

6. After the project is created, expand the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project in **Solution Explorer**.

> 7. Right-click **Dependencies** and choose **Add Reference**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Right-click **Dependencies**, and choose **Add Reference**.
```

> 8. Select **CellAnalyzerSharedLibrary** and choose **OK**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Select **CellAnalyzerSharedLibrary**, and choose **OK**.
```

> 9. Right-click the **Controllers** folder, and choose **Add > Controller**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Right-click the **Controllers** folder and choose **Add > Controller**.
```
No comma between two part step if you use "and".

10. In the **Add New Scaffolded Item** dialog, choose **API Controller - Empty** and then **Add**.

> 11. In the **Add Empty API Controller** dialog, name the controller **AnalyzeUnicodeController** and then choose **Add**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
11. In the **Add Empty API Controller** dialog, name the controller **AnalyzeUnicodeController**, and then choose **Add**.
```
Three-part steps use commas or ">" between parts.

12. Open the **AnalyzeUnicodeController.cs** file and add the following code as a method to the `AnalyzeUnicodeController` class.

```csharp
[HttpGet]
public ActionResult<string> AnalyzeUnicode(string value)
{
    if (value == null)
    {
        return BadRequest();
    }
    return CellAnalyzerSharedLibrary.CellOperations.GetUnicodeFromText(value);
}
```

> 11. Right-click the CellAnalyzerRESTAPI project and choose **Set as Startup Project**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
11. Right-click the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project and choose **Set as Startup Project**.
```

> 12. From the **Debug** menu, choose **Start Debugging**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
12. On the **Debug** menu, choose **Start Debugging**.
```

13. A browser will launch. Enter the following URL to test that the REST API is working: **https://localhost:44323/api/analyzeunicode?value=test**. You should see a string returned with Unicode values for each character.

## Create the Office web add-in

> When you create the Office web add-in, it will need to call the REST API. First you need to get the port number of the REST API server and save it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create the Office web add-in, it will make a call to the REST API. But first, you need to get the port number of the REST API server and save it for later.
```

### Save the SSL port number

> 1. If you haven't already, start Visual Studio 2019 and open the **\start\Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you haven't already, start Visual Studio 2019, and open the **\start\Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.
```

2. In the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project, expand **Properties**, and open the **launchSettings.json** file.

> 3. Find the line of code with the **sslPort** value, copy the port number and save it somewhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Find the line of code with the **sslPort** value, copy the port number, and save it somewhere.
```

### Add the Office web add-in project

> To keep things simple, you'll keep all the code in one solution. You'll add the Office web add-in project to the existing Visual Studio solution. However, if you are familiar with the [Yeoman generator for Office Add-ins](https://github.com/OfficeDev/generator-office) and Visual Studio Code you can also run `yo office` to build the project. The steps are very similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep things simple, keep all the code in one solution. Add the Office web add-in project to the existing Visual Studio solution. However, if you are familiar with the [Yeoman generator for Office Add-ins](https://github.com/OfficeDev/generator-office) and Visual Studio Code you can also run `yo office` to build the project. The steps are very similar.
```

> 1. If you haven't already, start Visual Studio 2019 and open the **\start\Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you haven't already, start Visual Studio 2019, and open the **\start\Cell-Analyzer.sln** solution.
```

2. Right-click the solution in **Solution Explorer** and choose **Add > New Project**.

> 3. In the **Add a new project dialog**, choose **Excel Web Add-in** and choose **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the **Add a new project dialog**, choose **Excel Web Add-in**, and choose **Next**.
```

> 5. In the **Configure your new project** dialog, set the following fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In the **Configure your new project** dialog, set the following fields:
```

>     - Set the  **Project name** to **CellAnalyzerWebAddin**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Set the **Project name** to **CellAnalyzerWebAddin**.
```

    - Leave the **Location** at it's default value.
    - Set the **Framework** to **4.7.2** or later.
2. Choose **Create**.

> 3. In the **Choose the add-in type** dialog, select **Add new functionalities to Excel** and choose **Finish**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the **Choose the add-in type** dialog, select **Add new functionalities to Excel**, and choose **Finish**.
```

### Add UI and functionality to the Office web add-in

> 1. Open the **Home.html** file and replace the `<body>` contents with the following HTML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the **Home.html** file, and replace the `<body>` contents with the following HTML.
```

```html
<button id="btnShowUnicode" onclick="showUnicode()">Show Unicode</button>
<p>Result:</p>
<div id="txtResult"></div>
```

> 2. Open the **Home.js** file and replace the entire contents with the following code. Substitute the **sslPort** number you saved previously from the **launchSettings.json** file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Open the **Home.js** file, and replace the entire contents with the following code. Substitute the **sslPort** number you saved previously from the **launchSettings.json** file.
```

            const url = "https://localhost:<ssl port number>/api/analyzeunicode?value=" + range.values[0][0];
            $.ajax({
                type: "GET",
                url: url,
                success: function (data) {
                    let htmlData = data.replace(/\r\n/g, '<br>');
                    $("#txtResult").html(htmlData);
                }
            });
        });
    });
}
```

It's worth noting that in the previous code the returned string will be processed to replace carriage return line feeds with `<br>` HTML tags. You may occasionally run into situations where a return value that works perfectly fine for .NET in the VSTO Add-in will need to be adjusted on the Office web add-in side to work as expected. In this case the REST API and shared class library are only concerned with returning the string. The `showUnicode()` method is responsible for formatting return values correctly for presentation.

### Allow CORS from the Office web add-in

The Office.js library requires CORS on outgoing calls, such as the one made from the `ajax` call to the REST API server. Use the following steps to allow calls from the Office web add-in to the REST API.

> 1. In **Solution Explorer** select the **CellAnalyzerWebAddinWeb** project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In **Solution Explorer**, select the **CellAnalyzerWebAddinWeb** project.
```

2. From the **View** menu, choose **Properties Window** (if the window is not already displayed).

> 3. In the properties window, copy the value of the **SSL URL** and save it somewhere. This is the URL that you need to allow through CORS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the properties window, copy the value of the **SSL URL**, and save it somewhere. This is the URL that you need to allow through CORS.
```

> 4. In the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project open the **Startup.cs** file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project, open the **Startup.cs** file.
```

    public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
    {
        services.AddCors(options =>
        {
            options.AddPolicy(MyAllowSpecificOrigins,
            builder =>
            {
                builder.WithOrigins("https://localhost:44397")
                .AllowAnyMethod()
                .AllowAnyHeader()
                .AllowCredentials();
            });
        });
        services.AddMvc().SetCompatibilityVersion(CompatibilityVersion.Version_2_2);
    }

    // This method gets called by the runtime. Use this method to configure the HTTP request pipeline.
    public void Configure(IApplicationBuilder app, IHostingEnvironment env)
    {
        if (env.IsDevelopment())
        {
            app.UseDeveloperExceptionPage();
        }
        else
        {
            // The default HSTS value is 30 days. You may want to change this for production scenarios, see https://aka.ms/aspnetcore-hsts.
            app.UseHsts();
        }

        app.UseCors(MyAllowSpecificOrigins);
        app.UseHttpsRedirection();
        app.UseMvc();
    }
}
```

### Run the add-in

> 1. In **Solution Explorer** right-click the top node **Solution 'Cell-Analyzer'** and choose **Set Startup Projects**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click the top node **Solution 'Cell-Analyzer'**, and choose **Set Startup Projects**.
```

2. In the **Solution 'Cell-Analyzer' Property Pages** dialog, select **Multiple startup projects**.

> 3. Enable the Start action for each of the following projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enable the **Start** action for each of the following projects.
```

Author: fixed

    - CellAnalyzerRESTAPI
    - CellAnalyzerWebAddinWeb
    - CellAnalyzerWebAddin
1. Choose **OK**.
2. From the **Debug** menu, choose **Start Debugging**.

Excel will run and sideload the Office web add-in. You can test that the localhost REST API service is working correctly by entering a text value into a cell, and choosing the **Show Unicode** button in the Office web add-in. It should call the REST API and display the unicode values for the text characters.

## Publish to an Azure App Service

> You eventually want to publish the REST API project to the cloud. In the following steps you'll see how to publish the CellAnalyzerRESTAPI project to a Microsoft Azure App Service. See [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) for information on how to get an Azure account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You eventually want to publish the REST API project to the cloud. In the following steps you'll see how to publish the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project to a Microsoft Azure App Service. See [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) for information on how to get an Azure account.
```

> 1. In **Solution Explorer** right-click the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project and choose **Publish**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click the **CellAnalyzerRESTAPI** project, and choose **Publish**.
```

> 2. In the **Pick a publish target** dialog, select **Create New** and choose **Create Profile**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the **Pick a publish target** dialog, select **Create New**, and choose **Create Profile**.
```

3. In the **App Service** dialog, select the correct account, if it is not already selected.

> 4. The fields for the **App Service** dialog will be set to defaults for your account. Generally the defaults work fine, but you can change them at this point if you want any different settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The fields for the **App Service** dialog will be set to defaults for your account. Generally the defaults work fine, but you can change them if you prefer different settings.
```

> 5. Choose **Create** in the **App Service** dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In the **App Service** dialog, choose **Create**.
```

6. The new profile will be displayed in a **Publish** page. Choose **Publish** to build and deploy the code to the App Service.

> You can test the service at this point by opening a browser and entering a URL that goes directly to the new service. For example use `https://<myappservice>.azurewebsites.net/api/analyzeunicode?value=test` where *myappservice* is the unique name you created for the new App Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now test the service. Open a browser and enter a URL that goes directly to the new service. For example, use `https://<myappservice>.azurewebsites.net/api/analyzeunicode?value=test` where *myappservice* is the unique name you created for the new App Service.
```

### Use the Azure App Service from the Office web add-in

The final step is to update the code in the Office web add-in to use the Azure App Service instead of localhost.

> 1. In **Solution Explorer** expand the **CellAnalyzerWebAddinWeb** project and open the **Home.js** file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In **Solution Explorer**, expand the **CellAnalyzerWebAddinWeb** project, and open the **Home.js** file.
```

2. Change the `url` constant to use the URL for your Azure App Service as shown in the following line of code. Replace `<myappservice>` with the unique name you created for the new App Service.
    ```JavaScript
    const url = "https://<myappservice>.azurewebsites.net/api/analyzeunicode?value=" + range.values[0][0];
    ```

> 3. In **Solution Explorer** right-click the top node **Solution 'Cell-Analyzer'** and choose **Set Startup Projects**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click the top node **Solution 'Cell-Analyzer'**, and choose **Set Startup Projects**.
```

4. In the **Solution 'Cell-Analyzer' Property Pages** dialog, select **Multiple startup projects**.

> 5. Enable the Start action for each of the following projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Enable the **Start** action for each of the following projects:
```

Not sure if the UI is "Start" or "Start action". It should be bold if it's in the UI. This occurs previously so please verify.

    - CellAnalyzerWebAddinWeb
    - CellAnalyzerWebAddin
6. Choose **OK**.
7. From the **Debug** menu, choose **Start Debugging**.

> Excel will run and sideload the Office web add-in. You can test that the App Service is working correctly by entering a text value into a cell, and choosing the **Show Unicode** button in the Office web add-in. It should call the service and display the unicode values for the text characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Excel will run and sideload the Office web add-in. To test that the App Service is working correctly, enter a text value into a cell, and choose **Show Unicode** in the Office web add-in. It should call the service and display the unicode values for the text characters.
```

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial you've seen how to create an Office web add-in that uses shared code with the original VSTO add-in. You've seen how you can maintain both VSTO code for Office on Windows, and an Office web add-in for Office on other platforms. You've refactored VSTO C# code into a shared library and deployed it to an Azure App Service. You've created an Office web add-in that uses the shared library so that you don't have to rewrite the code in JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial you learned how to create an Office web add-in that uses shared code with the original VSTO add-in. You learned how to maintain both VSTO code for Office on Windows, and an Office web add-in for Office on other platforms. You refactored VSTO C# code into a shared library and deployed it to an Azure App Service. You created an Office web add-in that uses the shared library so that you don't have to rewrite the code in JavaScript.
```
